---
layout:     post
title:      How I Lost My Motivation To Draw - And How I Got It Back
date:       2016-08-27 08:00:00
uuid:       EBD37FCD-F9C0-49A7-B1C5-B748922CCF6E
draft:      true
categories: musings
---

People often admit to being prolific, if perhaps not proficient,
artists in high school. I was no different. Class was my most
productive time---I placed myself strategically at the back, hoping my
teacher would think I was frantically taking notes on 19th century
French literature instead of doing crude drawings of video game
characters.

In college my output slowed down, but after graduation I decided to
get more serious about drawing. Aside from a one-page feature in
Amazing Spider-Man on how to draw hands like Mark Bagley I had been
completely self-taught, but now I decided it was time to learn how to
draw "properly". So I bought some drawing books, rolled up my sleeves
(a necessary precaution against graphite stains) and got to work.

Initially things went well. I did studies, exercises and still lifes
as the books prescribed, but just as my skills started to improve
something unexpected happened: I stopped drawing. I had lost my
motivation. I tried habit-building techniques, joining a study group
and buying new art supplies (has that ever worked for anybody?), but
no matter what I tried I couldn’t seem to keep drawing for more than
a couple of weeks. But then something changed.

I was listening to an [episode of the Pencil Kings
podcast][pencil-kings] where the host was giving advice on how to get
back into art: "When you start to get serious", he said, "you start to
get hard on yourself. You risk losing the element of fun. If you love
Ninja Turtles, why not draw Ninja Turtles? What’s forcing you to only
draw nude figure studies?" I paused the podcast and started
thinking---when was the last time I had drawn something just for fun?
I couldn't remember.

Maybe the reason it was so hard for me to keep motivated was that
I was pushing myself too hard? As an experiment, I put aside my books
and started drawing only from imagination. This turned out to be
harder than expected; I had been focusing so much on what I *should*
draw that I had lost touch with what I actually *wanted* to draw.
Thinking back to what I used to draw in high school was a good
exercise---it turned out that the 31-year-old me enjoyed crude
drawings of video game characters just as much as the 13-year-old me.

Bit by bit, I managed to rehabilitate my "fun drawing" muscle, and as
the fun came back to drawing so did my motivation. I'm not saying that
you should give up on deliberate practice, but there needs to be
a balance between the two. Drawing from imagination has actually made
me more motivated to study because it highlights gaps in my knowledge;
if I’m drawing a character and I can't get the arms right, then I know
I need to study more anatomy. And once I've studied anatomy, I know
the dividends will be arms that look more like arms and less like
unusually thick spaghetti.

Nathan Aardvark summed it up nicely in a [recent blog
post][nathan-aardvardk]:

> Learning to draw is hard, and not always fun. In fact, it's often so
> frustrating that people just give up. We have to balance the learning
> with the 'funning'.  We have to have fun drawing if we hope to make
> any progress.

A lot of drawing intro courses for beginners say you should start with
mastering lines, some say you should start with studying shapes. I say
hold off on that for a second and ask yourself if you truly care for
what you’re drawing. If not, maybe it’s time to turn to your
17-year-old self for advice?

[nathan-aardvardk]: https://www.patreon.com/posts/tutorial-85-4892411
[pencil-kings]: https://www.pencilkings.com/whats-really-stopping-you-from-making-art/
